## Stochastic and Property-Based Testing

The term "stochastic" comes from the Greek _stokhastikos_, which is a form of _stokhazesthai_, which means "aim at" or "guess".  It's a good etymology for __stochastic testing__, which uses random processes that can be analyzed using statistics, but not exactly predicted.  At first blush, it may seem ridiculous to use randomness in software testing; after all, isn't the fundamental concept of testing to determine what the observed behavior is and if it equal to the expected behavior?  If you don't know what the input is, how would you know what the expected output it?

The answer is that there are expected behaviors and properties you expect from a system, no matter what the input.  For example, no matter what code is passed to a compiler, you will expect it not to crash.  It may generate an error message saying that the code is unparseable.  It may make an executable.  That executable may run, or it may not.  You do expect the system not to have a segmentation fault.  Thus, you can still run tests where the expected behavior is something like "does not crash the system".

By providing a method for the system to use random data as an input, you also reduce the cost of testing.  No longer do you have to imagine lots of specific test cases, and then painstakingly program all of them in or write them down as test cases.  Instead, you just tie together some sort of random number generator and some way to generate data based on it, and your computer can do all the work of generating test cases.  Even though the random number generator probably won't be nearly as good as a dedicated testing professional to coming up with edge cases, varying equivalence classes, etc., it will often find many problems simply by the sheer number of tests it can generate and how quickly it can do it.

Stochastic testing is also referred to as __monkey testing__, by analogy with a monkey banging on computer keys.  However, "stochastic testing" sounds much more impressive if you are talking to your manager, or, say, writing a book on software testing.

### Infinite Monkeys and Infinite Typewriters

There is an old parable about monkeys and typewriters, which normally would not seem like two things that go together well.  The parable states that given a million monkeys and infinite amount of time, the monkeys will eventually write the works of Shakespeare (NB these are immortal monkeys in this scenario).  Stochastic testing follows a similar principle - given a large enough set of random input (a million monkeys banging on keys) and a large enough period of time, defects will be found.  In this analogy, our tester is William Shakespeare (don't let the comparison go to your head).  He could certainly write the works of Shakespeare in less time than the million monkeys.  However, monkeys (like the computer's random number generator) are much cheaper than re-animating Zombie William Shakespeare.  Similarly, even if the random number generator isn't as good a writer of tests as you (or Shakespeare), by sheer dint of numbers, it's bound to hit on numerous interesting edge cases and perhaps find defects.

Of course, since you - or more precisely, the stochastic testing system - may not know exactly what the expected behavior should be for a given input, you need to check for properties of the system.  