# Conclusion

Tens of thousands of words later, hopefully you've learned a little bit about testing software.  You would have to be trying pretty hard not to have learned something in the time you've been reading this.  However, you've only just scratched the surface!  Many topics have only received the most cursory of outlines, when they deserve so much more.  It would be easy to fill up an entire book on performance testing (to which I only dedicated a chapter), penetration testing (to which I devoted a section), or formal verification (to which I only referred to a few times).  Testing software in any specific domain is going to come with its own set of challenges.  If you become involved in testing any non-trivial application, you could probably write a reasonably-sized book on the corner cases specific to it.

As I mentioned in the introduction, this book was meant to be a whirlwind tour of the topic.  Nobody thinks that they understand Paris after staying there for a day and seeing nothing but the Eiffel Tower.  I encourage you to research further in topics that interest you, and to keep abreast of developments in software testing.  Just like any field in software, best practices are constantly changing and being updated, and we are figuring out better ways to do things, better understanding of theory, and developing better tools.

Ensuring the quality of software is a noble undertaking, and there are many different ways to go about doing it.  I hope that your appetite for software quality has been whetted and that you go on to help produce software as free from unknown defects as is humanly possible.  I will grant you that that is a strange and specific wish, but what can I say?  I'm a strange and specific kind of guy.
